The game is not technically turn-based.  But you are a speedrunner.  For you it might as well be.  Every 'turn' is 1 second.  

You spawn at the Shrine in the bottom left.

Your goal is to finish the game (by defeating the final boss) as quickly as possible.

The game is deterministic.  If you find yourself needing to choose e.g. a square for an enemy to move to when two are equidistant from you, choose the lower-numbered on (lowest y, then lowest x).

You have 3 Life.  If that ever hits 0, you die and you respawn (with full life and all progress saved) at the last shrine you interacted with.

Each turn, you may either:
1. Move up to 2 spaces (not diagonally)
OR
2. Attack an adjacent space.  If there is an enemy in that space:
  a. It takes 1 damage.
  b. It is knocked back 1 space away from you (if possible).
  c. It skips its next action.
OR
3. Interact (various effects depending on what is at your location).
                                            

You can express commands with two characters per turn:

ww  (move 2 spaces north)
wa  (move 1 space north and 1 space west)
a.  (move 1 space west and end turn)
xa  (attack west)


UPGRADES:
Water Boots: helps with Water, see below,
Flame Shield: helps with Lava, see below.
Woodcutter's Axe: helps with Trees, see below.
Desert Cloak: helps with Desert, see below.
Bow: when you attack, the attack continues in a straight line until it hits an enemy.
Shrine Maiden's Blessing: At a Shrine, you can use your turn to warp to another shrine.  This takes 4 turns total (the turn you use it, plus a travel animation that takes 3 seconds).

TERRAINS:

WATER (blue): if you enter water without the Water Boots, you die.
LAVA (red): if you enter lava without the Flame Shield, you die.
TREE (dark green): impassible.  With the Woodcutter's Axe, you can attack a Tree to remove it and replace it with Grass.
DESERT (yellow): without the Desert Cloak, if you begin your turn in the Desert, you take 1 damage, and for your turn you can only move 1 space.
WALL (border between squares): impassible.

If a figure would be knocked back into impassible terrain, it stops moving.
If a figure finds itself in impassible terrain for some reason, push it to an adjacent empty space.  If no such space exists, it dies.
(I believe the only way for this to happen without glitches is for a sawblade to push you into a wall).

Many things will knock the player flying back 2 tiles.  
If the middle tile is impassible, they will bounce off the wall and not move.  
But if the middle tile is only hazardous, they will be knocked over it and will be fine.
(This is one of the main potential skips before glitches).

LOCATIONS:

Shrine: you may interact with a Shrine to restore your HP to full and set it as your respawn point.
Pickups: you may interact with a Power Gem or an Item to pick it up.
Seals: see below.

ENEMIES:

  Ogre.  

HP 3.  On its turn:

1. If you are next to it, it attacks you.  This deals 1 damage and knocks you flying back 2 spaces.
OR
2. If it is within 5 spaces of you, it moves 1 space towards you.
OR
3. Otherwise, it stays still.

An Ogre cannot enter water/lava, and will die if knocked into them.

  Lava Snake.  

HP 1.  Always spawns in Lava, stationary.  On its turn:

1. If you are collinear with it and within 5 spaces, it aims at you and takes a deep breath.
2. On its next turn after that, it breathes fire in that direction.  This deals 1 damage and knocks you flying back 2 spaces if you are still in that direction.
3. Otherwise, it does nothing.

  Sawblade.  

Spawns with a given pattern, moves 1 space/turn following that pattern (back and forth down a corridor?  In a circle around a room?)

You cannot move into it (treat as impassible terrain.  If you try, you fail to move and suffer 1 damage).

If it moves into you, you take 1 damage and are knocked flying back 2 spaces (in the direction of its movement).

  D(ark?) E(mperor?) F(estin?)

The final boss.  Spawns in a 5x5 room with a Seal in each corner.

He behaves an an Ogre except:

1. He will only aggro onto the player if they are in the room.  If they are not, he will move back towards the center of the room. 
2. He has infinite health (though he is still subject to knockback and stun).  
  a. To defeat him, the player must Interact with the four Seals in the corners of his room.  
  b. Each interaction consumes 4 Power Gems and breaks that Seal.  
  c. Once all three are broken, he dies in one hit.


GLITCHES:

The game is divided into rounds.

Round 0: Each player gets the best time they can on the basic map.
Round 1,2,3...: Each player draws a random Glitch.  They (and only they) may use that glitch this round.  In subsequent rounds, however, all players may use that glitch.

So you might have:

Round 1: Andrew knows Glitch X. Sean knows Glitch Y.
Round 2: Andrew knows Glitches X, Y and A.  Sean knows Glitches X, Y and B.
Round 3: Andrew knows Glitches X, Y, A, B and P.  Sean knows Glitches X, Y, A, B and Q.

(by which point you likely have every glitch in the game, unless we can get rather a lot of different good ones)

GLITCHES I THINK ARE GOOD:

  CORNER CLIP

If you are at the outside corner of a wall:

YOU _____
    |
    |

you can exploit a hole in the wall hitbox.  Use your turn to move through the wall, into the corner tile:

    _____
    |YOU
    |

You cannot do this if the corner tile is occupied or impassible.

  SHRINEWARP MOMENTUM

Behind the scenes, the shrine warp moves you to your destination over the course of 3 seconds.  

By entering a move command at the right time, you can have your character begin moving just as the warp begins, and retain this momentum through the warp.

This causes you to land 3 tiles offset from the target shrine, in whichever direction you chose.


  SUPERSLIDE

By 

GLITCHES I AM LESS SURE/NOT SURE OF:

  INFINITE SWORD GLITCH

By attacking at the right timing, you can lock your character in the attack animation.

To set this up, you spend a turn attacking.  From now on, your character is attacking in that direction every turn (even if you moved).

This continues until you die and respawn.

  SPAWNING SAVESTATE

By closing out of a previous run in the right (wrong?) way, you can confuse the game when you start a new run.  It will spawn you at a shrine of your choice.

(This is neat, and fairly realistic, but mostly I think it just ends up being used to spawn next to a helpful item, I'm not convinced by the gameplay).

  RESPAWN EXPLOIT

If you die at the same time as collecting an item, you collect the item, but it is not removed from the map.

(While this is very realistic, it lends itself to really bad runs where you find the quickest Power Gem to collect ten times in a row.)
